The Sovereign Computer Vision Stack: A Definitive Architecture for Open-Source Autonomy1. Executive SummaryThe rapid commoditization of computer vision has been driven largely by integrated SaaS platforms that abstract the complexity of the machine learning lifecycle. Products such as viseon have established a high benchmark for usability, offering a cohesive ecosystem that spans dataset management (viseon), annotation (Annotate), model training (Train), deployment (Inference), and post-processing (viseon). These platforms function as a unified control plane, significantly lowering the barrier to entry for deploying vision systems. However, this convenience often comes at the cost of data sovereignty, subscription overhead, and architectural rigidity. For enterprises operating in regulated environments, researchers requiring granular control, or organizations prioritizing long-term cost efficiency, reliance on closed-source, cloud-tethered infrastructure is increasingly untenable.This report presents a comprehensive architectural blueprint for the "viseon" stack—a fully autonomous, open-source clone of the proprietary viseon ecosystem. The mandate is strict: to replicate the entire functional spectrum of the target ecosystem using "opensource and nothing else." This requires not merely replacing individual tools but engineering a cohesive pipeline where the sum of open components equals the integrated experience of a managed service.Our analysis dissects the target ecosystem into five critical operational domains: Data Management & Curation, Annotation & Labeling, Version Control & Lineage, Training & Experimentation, and Inference & viseon. For each domain, we identify best-in-class open-source alternatives—specifically Voxel51 (FiftyOne) for visual curation, CVAT and Label Studio for annotation, DVC for versioning, Ultralytics YOLO and MLflow for training, and a custom FastAPI/ONNX server for inference. Crucially, we detail the integration logic required to bind these disparate tools into a unified workflow that mirrors the seamless experience of the viseon SDK and the viseon library.The report delves deep into the implementation of the viseon layer itself, exploring how to replicate advanced analytics like zone-based counting, object tracking (using ByteTrack and BoxMOT), and real-time visualization without proprietary dependencies. We further explore the infrastructure requirements, proposing a Docker-based microservices architecture that ensures reproducibility and scalability. By strictly adhering to open-source principles, this architecture offers a robust, future-proof foundation for computer vision that grants organizations total ownership of their data, models, and intellectual property.2. Architectural Philosophy: The Case for Sovereign InfrastructureThe decision to transition from a managed SaaS platform to a self-hosted, open-source stack is rarely driven by a single factor. It is a strategic shift that redefines an organization's relationship with its technical capabilities. To successfully clone the "viseon" ecosystem, one must first understand the architectural principles that make the proprietary version successful and then translate those principles into an open context.2.1 The Monolith vs. The Microservice EcosystemProprietary platforms act as monolithic integrated development environments (IDEs) for computer vision. They couple the data layer (images) with the logic layer (training) and the presentation layer (annotation UI). Replicating this in the open-source world requires a microservices approach. There is no single open-source tool that does everything viseon does. Instead, we must assemble a "best-of-breed" coalition.The Integration Challenge: The primary value of a platform like viseon is not just the tools themselves, but the glue between them—the seamless movement of data from annotation to training. In our open stack, this glue is code. We must architect a Python SDK (a clone of viseon) that orchestrates the movement of data between our chosen components: FiftyOne (Management), CVAT (Annotation), and DVC (Storage).The "Nothing Else" Mandate: The requirement for "opensource and nothing else" implies a rejection of "freemium" wrappers that ultimately depend on cloud APIs. For instance, while some inference servers offer open-source distinct components, they may rely on a cloud control plane for API key management or logging. Our architecture explicitly filters for tools that are fully functional in an air-gapped environment.2.2 Data Sovereignty as a Core Design ConstraintIn the target proprietary model, data sovereignty is often relinquished in exchange for convenience. Images are uploaded to the provider's cloud, and models are trained on shared GPU clusters. The viseon stack inverts this.Local-First Design: All data resides on infrastructure controlled by the user—whether that is a local workstation, an on-premise server rack, or a private VPC bucket (e.g., MinIO or AWS S3 managed by the user).Compliance Readiness: By ensuring that pixels never leave the user's VPC, the viseon stack inherently satisfies strict compliance frameworks like GDPR, HIPAA, and ITAR, which are often stumbling blocks for public cloud vision platforms.2.3 The Modular "viseon" ConceptThe term "viseon" in this context refers to two distinct concepts which must be replicated:The Library: A set of software utilities for post-processing model outputs (filtering, drawing, counting).The Process: The overarching workflow of managing the model lifecycle.Our architecture addresses both. We will leverage the actual open-source viseon library 1 as the engine for the former, while building a custom pipeline to handle the latter.3. The Data Layer: Curation and ManagementThe foundation of any computer vision platform is its ability to ingest, visualize, and manage large unstructured datasets. The viseon SDK provides methods to upload images, group them into projects, and visualize them in a web UI ("Universe"). The open-source equivalent must offer robust database capabilities, semantic search, and an intuitive visual interface.3.1 The Visual Database: Voxel51 (FiftyOne)FiftyOne by Voxel51 stands out as the premier open-source component for this layer. Unlike a simple file explorer, FiftyOne creates a MongoDB-backed registry of the dataset, allowing for SQL-like querying of visual data.33.1.1 Architecture of the RegistryFiftyOne does not duplicate media files. Instead, it stores filepaths and metadata. This "pointer-based" architecture allows it to manage massive datasets (millions of images) without significant storage overhead.The Sample Primitive: The fundamental unit in FiftyOne is the Sample. A Sample encapsulates the image path, metadata (size, resolution), and all associated Label objects (detections, classifications, segmentations). This mirrors the "Image Asset" concept in proprietary platforms.Extensibility: FiftyOne supports custom fields. This allows the viseon stack to store arbitrary project metadata—such as "camera_id," "timestamp," or "location"—directly on the sample, enabling complex filtering (e.g., "Show me all images from Camera 05 taken at night").53.1.2 Replicating "Dataset Health" FeaturesA key value proposition of the target platform is the ability to diagnose dataset issues (e.g., class imbalance, null examples). FiftyOne replicates and extends this via the FiftyOne Brain.Uniqueness and Near-Duplicate Detection: The fob.compute_uniqueness() method analyzes the dataset to identify redundant samples. In video datasets, where adjacent frames are often identical, this feature is critical for reducing labeling costs and training time. It effectively clones the "Health Check" features of SaaS platforms.Visual Similarity and Embeddings: Using fob.compute_visualization(), the system can generate low-dimensional embeddings (using UMAP or t-SNE) of the dataset. This creates an interactive scatter plot where semantically similar images cluster together. This allows users to visually identify outliers (e.g., a corrupted image in a cluster of valid ones) or mine for hard negatives.63.2 The Storage Backend: MinIO and Local FilesystemsTo satisfy the "opensource and nothing else" requirement, we cannot rely on AWS S3 or Google Cloud Storage as mandatory dependencies. Instead, the architecture supports a pluggable storage backend.MinIO: For enterprise-grade deployments, the stack utilizes MinIO, an open-source, S3-compatible object storage server. This allows the system to scale horizontally across servers while maintaining a standard API for data access.Local Filesystem: For smaller deployments or research workstations, the stack defaults to local disk storage.Abstraction Layer: The "viseon SDK" (our custom glue code) must implement a storage abstraction that treats MinIO and local paths uniformly, ensuring that the upper layers (FiftyOne, Training) are agnostic to the physical location of the pixels.4. The Annotation Layer: Closing the Human LoopData management is passive; annotation is active. The viseon ecosystem includes a tightly integrated annotation tool (Annotate) that supports bounding boxes, polygons, and keypoints. To clone this, we must select an open-source tool that offers comparable UI/UX and integrate it bi-directionally with our data layer.4.1 Comparison of Open Source Annotation EnginesTwo primary candidates emerge for the open stack: CVAT (Computer Vision Annotation Tool) and Label Studio.Table 3: Feature Comparison of Open Source Annotation ToolsFeatureCVAT Label Studio Target (viseon)Primary DomainVision (Image/Video)Multimodal (Vision, NLP, Audio)VisionVideo SupportExcellent (Interpolation)Basic (Frame-by-frame)ExcellentUI ComplexityHigh (Power User)Low (User Friendly)Low (User Friendly)IntegrationSDK / APISDK / WebhooksIntegratedAuto-AnnotationSAM, YOLO (Built-in)ML Backend (Configurable)SAM, Auto-LabelFormat SupportCOCO, YOLO, VOC, TFRecordJSON, CSV, CoNLLVariousSelection for the Clone:For Video-heavy workflows, CVAT is the superior choice due to its robust keyframe interpolation and tracking features, which are essential for creating the tracking datasets found in the viseon/trackers domain.8For Image-centric workflows or projects requiring custom UI configurations, Label Studio offers a more modern, flexible experience.11Architectural Decision: The viseon stack will support both via a plugin interface, but we will treat CVAT as the primary default for high-precision computer vision tasks given its feature parity with professional video annotation suites.4.2 The Integration WorkflowThe "magic" of a SaaS platform is the seamless transition from "Dataset" to "Annotate." In our open stack, we engineer this via the FiftyOne-CVAT Integration.6Selection: The user queries FiftyOne for a subset of data (e.g., "unlabeled images with high uniqueness").Job Creation: The viseon clone script invokes the cvat-sdk. It creates a new "Task" or "Job" in the local CVAT instance and pushes the selected images (or video chunks) to the CVAT server.13Python# Conceptual SDK Code
import fiftyone as fo

dataset = fo.load_dataset("my_project")
view = dataset.match_tags("needs_labeling")

# The 'annotate' method acts as the bridge
view.annotate(
    anno_key="batch_01",
    backend="cvat",
    label_field="ground_truth",
    url="http://localhost:8080"
)
Annotation: Annotators work within the CVAT web interface. They utilize tools like the "AI Tools" (which can be backed by local SAM instances) to speed up labeling.Ingestion: Once the job is marked "Completed" in CVAT, the SDK pulls the annotations. Crucially, it converts the CVAT-specific formats (XML) into FiftyOne's internal Detections schema. This normalization is vital for keeping the dataset format-agnostic.4.3 Automated Labeling (Autodistill)To replicate the "Label Assist" or "Auto-Label" features, the stack integrates Autodistill.14 Autodistill is an open-source framework that uses large, slow foundation models (Base Models) to label data for smaller, faster models (Target Models).Mechanism: The user defines an ontology (e.g., "Person", "Forklift"). Autodistill uses a model like Grounding DINO or SAM (Segment Anything Model) to zero-shot detect these objects in the raw data.Pipeline: These generated labels are fed back into FiftyOne as "prediction" fields. Users can then review these in CVAT, treating them as a "pre-annotation" pass, significantly reducing manual effort. This achieves feature parity with the "Smart Polygon" features of the target proprietary platform.155. The Versioning Layer: Lineage and ReproducibilityProprietary platforms handle versioning implicitly. You create "Version 1," apply augmentations, and it is saved. In an open-source clone, we must be explicit. DVC (Data Version Control) is the industry standard for this task, bringing Git-like semantics to large datasets.165.1 Decoupling Data and CodeGit is ill-suited for large binary files (images). DVC solves this by decoupling the data content from the version history.The .dvc File: When a user "commits" a dataset in viseon, DVC computes a checksum (MD5) of the dataset directory. It creates a lightweight text file (e.g., dataset.dvc) containing this hash. This file is tracked in Git.The Cache: The actual image data is moved to a local cache directory (.dvc/cache) and symlinked back to the workspace. This ensures instant switching between versions without duplicating disk space.5.2 Replicating "Preprocessing and Augmentation"viseon Versions include steps like "Resize to 640x640" or "Grayscale." In viseon, these are implemented as DVC Stages.The dvc.yaml Pipeline: We define a reproduction pipeline.YAMLstages:
  preprocess:
    cmd: python scripts/preprocess.py --width 640 --height 640
    deps:
      - data/raw
    outs:
      - data/processed
  augment:
    cmd: python scripts/augment.py --rotate 90 --mosaic
    deps:
      - data/processed
    outs:
      - data/augmented
Reproducibility: If a user changes the augmentation parameters in scripts/augment.py, DVC knows that the data/augmented stage is invalid. Running dvc repro will re-execute only the necessary steps. This guarantees that "Dataset Version 3" is mathematically reproducible from the raw inputs and the processing code, a level of rigor that often exceeds proprietary "black box" versioning.6. The Modeling Layer: Training OrchestrationThe core computational task is training. The target ecosystem simplifies this with "One-Click Training." To clone this, we need a unified interface that orchestrates the training of state-of-the-art models (like YOLO) on our versioned data.6.1 Model Architecture: Ultralytics YOLOThe Ultralytics YOLO (You Only Look Once) library is the de facto standard for open-source object detection.18 It powers the training backend of many SaaS platforms and will serve as our core engine.Versatility: It supports Object Detection, Instance Segmentation, Pose Estimation (Keypoints), and Classification. This covers the full spectrum of tasks supported by the viseon ecosystem.Exportability: Ultralytics provides native export to ONNX, TensorRT, CoreML, and TFLite. This is critical for the "Deployment" phase of our pipeline.206.2 The Training UI: StreamlitTo avoid the command-line interface (CLI) barrier for less technical users, we construct a Streamlit application to serve as the "Training Dashboard".21Configuration: The UI allows users to select:Base Model: YOLOv8n, YOLOv8s, YOLOv11, etc.Hyperparameters: Epochs, Batch Size, Learning Rate, Image Size.Dataset Version: The app parses the local Git tags to allow selection of specific DVC data versions.Execution: Upon clicking "Train," the app triggers a background process. It monitors the standard output (stdout) to update progress bars and loss curves in real-time.Visualization: Post-training, the app displays the confusion_matrix.png and val_batch0_labels.jpg generated by the YOLO trainer, giving immediate visual feedback on model performance.236.3 Experiment Tracking: MLflowWhile Streamlit manages the current run, we need a historical record of all runs. MLflow replaces the "Training History" graphs of the proprietary platform.24Auto-Logging: Ultralytics YOLO has built-in integration with MLflow. By setting settings.update({'mlflow': True}), the trainer automatically logs metrics (mAP50, mAP50-95, precision, recall), parameters (epochs, batch_size), and artifacts (best model weights) to a local MLflow Tracking Server.Comparison: Users can launch the MLflow UI (mlflow ui) to compare runs side-by-side, answering questions like "Did the mosaic augmentation introduced in Version 4 improve small object detection?"7. The Inference Layer: High-Performance ServingThe viseon Inference product is a highly optimized serving engine. To build a "nothing else" clone, we must architect a serving solution that does not rely on cloud-mediated containers. We build this using FastAPI and ONNX Runtime.7.1 Container ArchitectureThe inference server is delivered as a Docker container. This ensures consistency across development (laptop) and production (edge device/cloud) environments.26Base Image: We utilize nvidia/cuda:11.8.0-cudnn8-runtime-ubuntu22.04 to ensure GPU acceleration is available via the NVIDIA Container Toolkit.28Microservice Design: The application is a FastAPI server exposing a /predict endpoint. It uses uvicorn as the ASGI server for high concurrency.7.2 The Runtime Engine: ONNXWe standardize on ONNX (Open Neural Network Exchange) as the inference format.Why ONNX? It breaks the dependency on the heavy PyTorch framework for inference. An ONNX Runtime environment is significantly smaller and often faster than a full PyTorch container. It also allows for hardware-specific optimizations (TensorRT execution provider on NVIDIA, OpenVINO on Intel) without changing the application code.29Pipeline Optimization:Preprocessing: The server implements "Letterboxing" (resizing with padding) using opencv-python-headless to maintain aspect ratio, matching the training preprocessing.31Inference: The ONNX session executes the graph.Post-processing: The raw tensor output (often `` for YOLOv8) is processed with Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to filter overlapping boxes. This logic is implemented purely in NumPy for speed.317.3 Dynamic BatchingTo clone the high throughput of commercial APIs, the server implements Dynamic Batching.Mechanism: Instead of processing requests one-by-one, incoming requests are placed in a queue. A background "micro-batcher" thread pulls available requests every $N$ milliseconds (or when the queue reaches a max batch size) and stacks them into a single tensor ``.Benefit: This maximizes GPU utilization. Processing 8 images in one batch is significantly faster than processing 8 images sequentially due to the massive parallelism of the GPU.328. The viseon Layer: Post-Processing and AnalyticsThe viseon library is the crown jewel of the viseon open-source suite. In our stack, it serves as the logic engine that consumes the raw data from the inference server and turns it into actionable business intelligence.8.1 The Detections PrimitiveThe core architectural decision is to standardize all model outputs into the sv.Detections class.Data Structure:Pythonimport viseon as sv
detections = sv.Detections(
    xyxy=numpy_array_of_boxes,
    confidence=numpy_array_of_scores,
    class_id=numpy_array_of_classes,
    tracker_id=numpy_array_of_ids  # Optional
)
Interoperability: This abstraction allows us to swap the underlying model (e.g., switching from YOLOv8 to a Transformer-based DETR) without changing a single line of the downstream analytics code.338.2 Replicating Advanced AnalyticsThe proprietary platform offers "Skills" like zone counting. We replicate these using viseon primitives.8.2.1 Zone-Based CountingPolygonZone: Users define a region of interest (ROI) as a set of coordinates. The sv.PolygonZone class uses vector math (ray casting algorithm) to determine if a detection's anchor point (e.g., bottom-center) is inside the polygon.34LineZone: For counting objects crossing a threshold (e.g., people entering a store), sv.LineZone tracks the state of detections across frames. It utilizes the vector cross-product of the object's movement vector and the line vector to trigger "In" or "Out" events.358.2.2 Filtering and SmoothingRaw model output can be jittery. The clone utilizes:sv.DetectionsSmoother: This maintains a buffer of recent detections and applies a moving average or voting mechanism to stabilize the bounding box coordinates and class predictions over time. This is essential for professional-grade video analytics.8sv.InferenceSlicer (SAHI Clone): For detecting small objects (e.g., defects on a wafer), the clone implements slicing inference. The large image is chopped into overlapping tiles; inference runs on each tile; and viseon merges the results using Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to remove duplicate detections at tile boundaries.188.3 Visualization FeaturesThe clone matches the visual polish of the target platform using viseon's annotators.BoxAnnotator & LabelAnnotator: Standard visualization.MaskAnnotator: For segmentation models, providing semi-transparent overlays.TraceAnnotator: Draws the historical path of an object, enabling "dwell time" or movement pattern visualization.21PixelateAnnotator: Useful for privacy compliance (redacting faces/license plates) directly in the edge processing pipeline.9. The Tracking Layer: Temporal UnderstandingObject tracking—assigning a unique ID to an object and maintaining it across frames—is a distinct capability from detection. The viseon/trackers repository provides implementations of algorithms like ByteTrack and DeepSORT. Our clone integrates these directly into the inference pipeline.9.1 Tracking AlgorithmsWe support a tiered tracking architecture based on computational resources:Tier 1: ByteTrack (Motion-Based): Best for high-FPS edge deployments. It uses Kalman filters to predict object motion and associates detections based on IoU (Intersection over Union). It effectively handles short-term occlusions by utilizing low-confidence detections that strictly motion-based trackers might miss.36Tier 2: DeepSORT / BoT-SORT (Appearance-Based): Best for complex scenarios where objects leave and re-enter the frame. These algorithms extract a visual embedding (ReID vector) from the object crop. They compare this embedding to a database of known tracks to re-associate objects even after significant occlusion or movement changes.389.2 Integration with viseonThe integration logic is handled by the BoxMOT library (an open-source tracking zoo) which wraps these algorithms.Workflow:Inference: Get detections (Boxes, Classes, Scores).Tracking Update: Pass detections to the tracker.Python# boxmot_tracker is an instance of e.g. ByteTrack
tracks = boxmot_tracker.update(detections, image)
Merge: The tracker returns detections with IDs. We construct a new sv.Detections object that includes the tracker_id field.Visualize: The LabelAnnotator now displays "Person #42" instead of just "Person", enabling unique counting logic.10. The Glue: Designing the viseon SDKTo truly clone viseon, we need a unified Python package that abstracts the complexity of the underlying tools. This "Glue Code" is the operational heart of the viseon stack.Proposed SDK Structure (viseon):viseon.Project: Represents a FiftyOne dataset + DVC config..upload(path): Copies images to data/raw, runs dvc add, and ingests to FiftyOne..version(name): Runs dvc commit and git tag.viseon.Annotate: Wrapper for CVAT interactions..send_to_cvat(subset): Uploads samples to CVAT..pull_from_cvat(): Downloads and merges annotations.viseon.Train: Wrapper for Ultralytics/Streamlit..train(version, model): Generates config and spawns the trainer.viseon.Deploy: Wrapper for Docker/FastAPI..build(): Exports ONNX and builds the Docker container..serve(): Runs the container.This SDK provides the "Developer Experience" (DX) that makes the open stack usable for data science teams, replacing the convenient API calls of the proprietary alternative.11. Deployment and OperationsThe final piece of the puzzle is operationalizing the stack. We use Docker Compose to define the infrastructure as code.11.1 The Service MeshThe docker-compose.yml orchestrates the entire platform:MinIO: S3-compatible object storage (Port 9000).MongoDB: Backend for FiftyOne (Port 27017).FiftyOne Server: Visual Management UI (Port 5151).CVAT Stack: A collection of containers (Server, UI, Redis, DB) for annotation (Port 8080).MLflow Server: Experiment tracking UI (Port 5000).Training Agent: A CUDA-enabled container with access to the GPU, waiting for jobs from the Streamlit UI.Inference Service: The FastAPI/ONNX runtime, scalable via Docker Swarm or Kubernetes (Port 8000).11.2 GPU PassthroughFor the Training Agent and Inference Service, strictly open-source drivers (NVIDIA Linux Drivers) and the NVIDIA Container Toolkit are required. The compose file must specify:YAMLdeploy:
  resources:
    reservations:
      devices:
        - driver: nvidia
          count: all
          capabilities: [gpu]
This configuration ensures that the containers have direct access to the hardware for CUDA acceleration, a prerequisite for cloning the performance of viseon's cloud GPUs.2812. Conclusion: The Reality of the Open CloneThe analysis confirms that a functional clone of the proprietary viseon ecosystem is not only possible but architecturally robust using "opensource and nothing else."FiftyOne effectively replaces the Universe/Project visualization layer.CVAT provides a superset of the annotation capabilities, particularly for video.DVC offers versioning rigor that exceeds simple snapshotting.Ultralytics YOLO + MLflow replicates the training and tracking experience.FastAPI + ONNX + viseon creates a deployment engine that is performant, portable, and feature-rich.By integrating these components via a custom Python SDK and orchestrating them with Docker, organizations can achieve total data sovereignty, zero marginal cost for inference, and the freedom to modify any layer of the stack. This is the definitive path to independent computer vision infrastructure.